contraindication to general anaesthesia, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, need of continued use of intravenous antianginal medication, inabil- ity to undergo dipyridamole-thallium stress scintigraphy, non Q-wave myocardial in- farction in the previous two weeks, need of anticoagulant treatment, severe arrhythmias, and decompensated congestive heart failure
unstable cardiac disease; musculoskeletal disability preventing arm exercise; cognitive impairment limiting completion of questionnaires; untreated deafness precluding use of walk- man-type devices
recipients of previous allografts or had a positive cross-match for T- cell lymphocytes
myocardial infarction in the previous 3 months, admitted to hospital for unstable angina in the last 21 days, severe symptomatic heart failure, ventricular arrhyth- mias, cardiac transplant or judged to be poor surgical candidate
1. Surgically remediable cause for heart failure. 2. Consideration for heart transplantation. 3. Terminal cancer. 4. Participation in another trial. 5. Inability to provide informed consent
--
--
1. multiple fracture 2. pre-fracture terminal condition 3. alcoholism 4. chronic transfusion needs 5. acute cardiac or other acute severe medical conditions 6. contraindication to epidural analgesia Mean (SD) age in the liberal transfusion threshold: 81 (6.8) years Mean (SD) age in the restrictive transfusion threshold: 81 (7.3) years Number of men per intervention: 14/14
active cancer . pathological fractures . inability to understand or speak Danish without an interpreter . red blood cell transfusion refusal . fluid overload . irregular erthrocyte antibodies . previous participation in a trial Mean (SD) age in the liberal transfusion threshold: 88 (6.9) years Mean (SD) age in the restrictive transfusion threshold: 86 (6.8) years Number of men per intervention: 34/36
associated medical conditions that limited exercise tolerance, inability to communicate
--
clinical or radiological signs of CNS metastasis; inflammatory breast cancer; other concurrent or previous malignant disease; uncontrolled cardiac diseases; prior anti-HER2 therapy apart from trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting HER2+: 61.3% (57/93). We considered HER2+ women alone
prior chemotherapy for MBC or adjuvant chemotherapy within 6 months, clinical or radiologic evidence of CNS metastases; history of another malig- nancy, CHF or uncontrolled cardiac disease (angina, arrhythmias, hypertension); un- controlled serious intercurrent illness; and severe dyspnoea at rest. Patients with previous radiotherapy to indicator lesions were excluded from the response evaluation HER2+: not reported
atrial fibrillation, acute myocardial infarction ?3 months, angina pectoris at rest or induced by exercise, current enrolment in another clinical trial, and current participation in a regular exercise program (at least twice weekly).
receipt of a graft from a donor > 60 years of age, or with documented coronary disease or other heart disease; a previous or multiple-organ transplant; unstable haemodynamic status at the time of randomisation; creatinine level more than 250 mol/ L
emergency surgery; previous transplant; multiple-organ transplant including heart-lung transplant; active infection; hepatitis C; high positive panel reactive antibodies (> 15%); known sensitivity to daclizumab, ATG or mouse antigens; expected inability to be followed at the study centre for a full year; and inability to give informed consent
presence of associated medical conditions that limited exercise tolerance; inability to communicate English
Dense senile cataract; any other eye disease which could produce significant and per- manent loss of visual acuity during follow up; physical status that could prevent follow up; history of serious systemic or metabolic disease
complicated with aspiration and/or pneumonia, im- mediate need for endotracheal intubation, shock, and life-threatening hypoxia at study entry
--
--