 Volume 342 Number 9
 
·
 
613
 
PREVENTION OF REJECTION IN CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION BY BLOCKADE OF THE INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR
 
PREVENTION OF REJECTION IN CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION BY BLOCKADE 
OF THE INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR WITH A MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY
 
A
 
INAT
 
 B
 
ENIAMINOVITZ
 
, M.D., S
 
ILVIU
 
 I
 
TESCU
 
, M.D., K
 
ATHERINE
 
 L
 
IETZ
 
, M.D., M
 
ARY
 
 D
 
ONOVAN
 
, N.P., 
E
 
LIZABETH
 
 M. B
 
URKE
 
, R.N., B
 
ARBARA
 
 D. G
 
ROFF
 
, R.N., N
 
ILOO
 
 E
 
DWARDS
 
, M.D., 
 
AND
 
 D
 
ONNA
 
 M. M
 
ANCINI
 
, M.D.
 
A
 
BSTRACT
 
Background
 
Alloantigen-activated T cells express
the high-affinity interleukin-2 receptor. Specific block-
ade of this receptor with the human IgG1 monoclonal
antibody daclizumab may prevent rejection of allo-
grafts after cardiac transplantation without inducing
global immunosuppression.
 
Methods
 
We randomly assigned 55 nonsensitized
patients undergoing a first cardiac transplantation to
receive either induction therapy with daclizumab (1.0
mg per kilogram of body weight), given intravenously
within 24 hours after cardiac transplantation and ev-
ery two weeks thereafter, for a total of five doses, or
generalized immunosuppressive therapy. Concomi-
tant immunosuppression was achieved in both groups
with cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and pred-
nisone. The primary end points were the incidence
and severity of acute rejection, and the length of time
to a first episode of biopsy-confirmed rejection.
 
Results
 
Of the 55 patients in the study, 28 were
randomly assigned to receive daclizumab and 27
served as the control group. During induction thera-
py, the mean frequency of acute rejection episodes
(defined as a histologic grade of 2 or higher accord-
ing to the classification of the International Society
of Heart and Lung Transplants) was 0.64 per patient
in the control group and 0.19 per patient in the dacli-
zumab group (P=0.02). Acute rejection developed in
17 of 27 patients in the control group (63 percent), as
compared with 5 of 28 patients in the daclizumab
group (18 percent; relative risk, 2.8; 95 percent confi-
dence interval, 1.1 to 7.4; P=0.04). Throughout follow-
up, there were nine patients with episodes of acute
rejection of histologic grade 3 in the control group,
as compared with two in the daclizumab group (P=
0.03), and the time to a first episode of rejection was
significantly longer in the daclizumab group (P=0.04).
There were no adverse reactions to daclizumab and
no significant differences between the groups in the
incidence of infection or cancer during follow-up.
 
Conclusions
 
Induction therapy with daclizumab
safely reduces the frequency and severity of cardiac-
allograft rejection during the induction period. (N Engl
J Med 2000;342:613-9.)
 
©2000, Massachusetts Medical Society.
 
From the Divisions of Cardiology (A.B., B.D.G., D.M.M.) and Circula-
tory Physiology (A.B., D.M.M.) and the Department of Surgery (S.I.,
K.L., M.D., E.M.B., N.E.), Columbia–Presbyterian Medical Center, New
York. Address reprint requests to Dr. Beniaminovitz at 177 Fort Washing-
ton Ave., MHB 5-435, New York, NY 10032, or at ab49@columbia.edu.
 
CUTE rejection episodes adversely affect
short-term survival in recipients of cardi-
ac transplants.
 
1
 
 Rejection occurs most fre-
quently during the first three months after
transplantation, with the incidence decreasing expo-
nentially thereafter.
 
2
 
 Repeated or severe episodes of
allograft rejection may lead to the development of
A
 
cardiac-allograft vasculopathy, the main cause of death
after the first year in transplant recipients.
 
3-6
 
 Accord-
ingly, therapeutic strategies, such as the use of induc-
tion therapy with monoclonal or polyclonal antibod-
ies in the perioperative period, have been advocated to
decrease the frequency and severity of early allograft
rejection.
 
7
 
 The success of these nonselective agents
has varied.
 
7
 
 Allograft rejection is only delayed by their
use, and the generalized immunosuppression they in-
duce frequently increases the risk of opportunistic
infection and cancer. 
More selective agents that target key receptors, such
as the interleukin-2 receptor on activated T cells, may
be more effective than nonselective agents.
 
8
 
 In vivo
activation of the high-affinity interleukin-2 receptor
by interleukin-2 promotes the clonal expansion of the
activated T-cell population.
 
9
 
 Daclizumab (Zenapax,
Hoffmann–LaRoche, Nutley, N.J.) is a molecularly
engineered human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds but does not activate the high-affinity inter-
leukin-2 receptor. Because it consists of 90 percent
human immunoglobulin sequences, daclizumab has
low immunogenicity; its serum half-life is 21 days.
A previous study examined the administration of
daclizumab to recipients of cadaveric renal trans-
plants
 
10
 
 and found decreases in the number of epi-
sodes of allograft rejection and an increase in the time
to a first rejection episode without a concomitant in-
crease in the incidence of infection or cancer. The pur-
pose of the current study was to investigate the safety
and efficacy of daclizumab with respect to the fre-
quency and severity of acute rejection in nonsensi-
tized recipients of first cardiac transplants.
 
METHODS
 
Patients
 
We recruited a total of 55 consecutive adult patients between
January 1, 1998, and December 31, 1998. Patients were excluded
if they were recipients of previous allografts or had a positive cross-
match for T-cell lymphocytes. Patients were randomly assigned to
receive standard triple immunosuppressive therapy either with or
without daclizumab. Randomization was performed at the time of
transplantation with the use of sealed envelopes. The protocol was
approved by the institutional review board of Columbia–Presbyte-
rian Medical Center, and all patients gave written informed consent.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 614
 
·
 
March 2,  2000
 
The New England Journal  of  Medicine
 
Immunosuppressive Therapy
 
Triple-drug immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine, my-
cophenolate mofetil, and prednisone was administered to all the
patients. Oral cyclosporine was given preoperatively at a dose of
1 to 2 mg per kilogram of body weight, according to the patient’s
creatinine clearance rate. Intravenous cyclosporine was adminis-
tered as a continuous infusion at a dose of 1 to 2 mg per kilogram
per 24 hours until the patient could receive oral medications. The
doses of cyclosporine were adjusted to obtain a whole-blood trough
level of 300 to 350 ng per milliliter, as measured with the use of
a monoclonal assay (TDX, Abbott Laboratories, Abbot Park, Ill.),
for the first six weeks after transplantation. Target trough levels
decreased as the time after transplantation increased. After trans-
plantation, muromonab-CD3 (OKT3) or antithymocyte globulin
induction therapy was used instead of cyclosporine in patients with
prolonged renal dysfunction (defined by a creatinine concentra-
tion >2.5 mg per deciliter [221 
 
m
 
mol per liter]).
All the patients received 4 mg of azathioprine per kilogram oral-
ly before transplantation and then 2 mg per kilogram intravenous-
ly afterward until they were able to receive oral medications. The
dose of mycophenolate mofetil was then increased to a maximum
of 1500 mg twice daily over a period of three days.
Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered at a dose of
1 g intraoperatively and then 125 mg every eight hours for three
doses. Prednisone or an equivalent dose of methylprednisolone was
begun at 50 mg orally twice daily and tapered over the course of
seven days to 15 mg orally twice daily. After each negative biopsy,
the dose of prednisone was further tapered according to a stand-
ard schedule.
Daclizumab was given intravenously at a dose of 1 mg per kil-
ogram within 24 hours after transplantation and every two weeks
thereafter for a total of five doses.
 
Biopsy Schedule, Histologic Grading of Rejection, 
and Treatment of Rejection
 
Endomyocardial biopsies were performed weekly for the first
month after transplantation, every two weeks for the second month,
monthly through month 6, and then every two months through
month 12. Biopsy specimens were graded according to the stand-
ardized criteria of the International Society of Heart and Lung
Transplants (ISHLT).
 
11
 
 Acute allograft rejection was defined as a
histologic grade of 2 or higher according to the ISHLT criteria.
Patients with symptoms of heart failure or hemodynamic com-
promise were considered to have rejection even if the histologic
grade was lower than 2. Hemodynamic compromise was defined
as a pulmonary-capillary wedge pressure of more than 20 mm Hg,
a cardiac index of less than 2 liters per minute per square meter
of body-surface area, or a pulmonary arterial oxygen saturation
of less than 50 percent. Both the ISHLT grade and the degree of
hemodynamic compromise determined the type of treatment for
a particular episode of rejection. All the patients underwent an-
other biopsy 7 to 10 days after the treatment of an acute rejection
episode.
 
Immunologic Assays
 
HLA Typing
 
Serologic typing of HLA-A and HLA-B loci was performed by
standard microcytotoxicity techniques. HLA-DR typing was per-
formed by serologic analysis and DNA techniques with sequence-
specific oligonucleotide primers and the polymerase chain reaction.
 
Lymphocyte-Growth Assay
 
A fragment of a biopsy specimen was placed in medium sup-
plemented with recombinant interleukin-2 (5 U per milliliter) and
examined at 48 hours with a phase-inverted microscope. A semi-
quantitative scale (0 to 3) was used to score growth on the basis
of circumferential T-cell aggregation.
 
12
 
 A score of 1 or more was
considered positive.
 
Anti-HLA Antibodies
 
At the time of each endomyocardial biopsy, serum was screened
for complement-mediated lytic activity, in the presence or absence
of dithiothreitol, against T and B lymphocytes included in a panel
of 70 of the most common HLA class I and class II antigens. Serum
reactivity that persisted after treatment with dithiothreitol was
considered to indicate the presence of IgG alloantibodies, where-
as loss of reactivity indicated the presence of IgM alloantibodies.
Serum reactivity with both T-cell and B-cell panels indicated the
presence of anti-HLA class I antibodies. Serum reactivity with
B-cell panels, but not with T-cell panels, indicated the presence of
anti-HLA class II antibodies. Antibodies against both HLA class
I and HLA class II antigens were considered present in cases in
which serum reacted with both panels and B-cell reactivity exceed-
ed T-cell reactivity by a factor of more than two. The presence of
autoantibodies was considered to be ruled out by autologous se-
rum crossmatching with recipient T cells and B cells. These com-
bined methods have a high degree of sensitivity and specificity for
anti–HLA class I and class II antibodies.
 
13
 
End Points
 
The primary end points of the study were the incidence of bi-
opsy-confirmed rejection, the severity of rejection, and the length
of time to a first treated episode of rejection. Secondary end points
included the need for antilymphocytic therapy with muromonab-
CD3 or antithymocyte globulin, the presence of immunologic
indicators of alloreactivity, the duration of hospitalization after trans-
plantation, the frequency of readmissions, and the incidence of in-
fections and cancer. One-year survival and the mean daily doses of
prednisone at each month after transplantation were also compared.
 
Statistical Analysis
 
Differences in categorical variables between the two groups
were evaluated by chi-square analysis. Continuous variables were
compared between the groups with an unpaired Student’s t-test.
Kaplan–Meier plots with log-rank analysis were used to compare
the time to a first rejection episode and survival in the two groups.
 
RESULTS
 
A total of 55 patients were enrolled. Of these, 28
were randomly assigned to the daclizumab group and
27 to the control group by means of sealed enve-
lopes. The base-line characteristics of the two groups
were similar with respect to age, sex, donor’s age, the
need for prophylaxis against cytomegalovirus (given
if either the donor or the recipient was seropositive),
the presence of an HLA-DR match, and the duration
of follow-up (Table 1). The duration of cold ische-
mia was slightly but significantly shorter in the con-
trol group than in the daclizumab group (P=0.05).
All the patients in the daclizumab group received all
five doses of the drug. The trough levels of cyclospor-
ine were similar in the two groups throughout the fol-
low-up period (Fig. 1A). The number of patients who
were switched from cyclosporine to tacrolimus was
the same in both groups. In the control group, one
patient was switched because of neurotoxic effects,
one because of frequent episodes of allograft rejection,
one because of hirsutism, and one because of excessive
gingival hyperplasia. In the daclizumab group, one
patient was switched because of cyclosporine-induced
hemolytic–uremic syndrome, two because of hirsut-
ism, and one because of excessive gingival hyperplasia.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 PREVENTION OF REJECTION IN CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION BY BLOCKADE OF THE INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR
 
Volume 342 Number 9
 
·
 
615
 
Efficacy
 
The period of induction therapy (based on the dos-
ing regimen and the half-life of daclizumab) was three
months. During this period, acute rejection (defined
as a grade of 2 or higher according to the criteria of
the ISHLT) developed in 17 of the 27 patients in the
control group (63 percent), as compared with 5 of
the 28 in the daclizumab group (18 percent; relative
risk, 2.8; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.1 to 7.4;
P=0.04). The time to a first rejection episode was
significantly longer in the daclizumab group than in
the control group (Fig. 2) (P=0.04). The effect on
rejection was most evident in the first three months
(Table 2), with a frequency of rejection episodes of
0.64 per patient in the control group as compared
with 0.19 per patient in the daclizumab group (P=
0.02). The frequency of rejection episodes after three
months was similar in the two groups (0.54 in the
control group vs. 0.50 in the daclizumab group, P=
0.85). All rejection episodes after three months in
the daclizumab group were managed with additional
corticosteroids administered orally, except in the case
of one patient whose first episode occurred at month
4 and who presented with cardiogenic shock, which
led to death within 24 hours.
Overall, the severity of rejection episodes was also
significantly lower in the daclizumab group than in
the control group (Table 2), with only two episodes
of grade 3 rejection in the daclizumab group, as com-
pared with nine episodes in the control group (P=
0.03), throughout the follow-up period. Moreover,
none of the patients in the daclizumab group required
rescue therapy with muromonab-CD3 or antithymo-
cyte globulin for the treatment of rejection, whereas
five patients in the control group did require such
therapy (P=0.02). Similarly, fewer of the patients in
the daclizumab group had multiple episodes of rejec-
tion (Table 2). This effect was most pronounced dur-
ing the three-month induction period, when three
patients in the control group and no patients in the
daclizumab group had more than one episode of re-
jection (P=0.07).
 
Secondary End Points
 
The rate of use of antilymphocyte therapy was sig-
nificantly lower in the daclizumab group than in the
control group (six patients in the control group vs.
one patient in the daclizumab group, P=0.04). One
patient in the daclizumab group received muromo-
nab-CD3 because of cyclosporine-induced nephrotox-
ic effects, whereas in the control group, five of the six
patients who received antilymphocyte therapy were
treated for hemodynamically significant rejection. The
daily maintenance dose of corticosteroids was also sig-
nificantly lower in the daclizumab group than in the
control group by month 5, as shown in Figure 1B
(P=0.02 at months 5 and 6).
The median duration of hospitalization after trans-
plantation tended to be lower in the daclizumab group
than in the control group (13 vs. 16 days), with more
patients discharged within the first 14 days after trans-
plantation (17 vs. 12 patients).
100
400
1 6
200
300
2 3 4 5
Month
CYCLOSPORINE LEVEL (ng/ml)
Control groupH
Daclizumab group
340H
304
309H
323
327H
322
342H
313
302H
276
285H
262
Control group
Daclizumab group
C
yc
lo
sp
o
ri
n
eH
(n
g
/m
l)
 
B
 
*Plus–minus values are means ±SD.
†P=0.05.
 
T
 
ABLE
 
 1.
 
 C
 
LINICAL
 
 C
 
HARACTERISTICS
 
 
 
OF
 
 
 
THE
 
 
S
 
TUDY
 
 P
 
ATIENTS
 
.*
 
C
 
HARACTERISTIC
 
C
 
ONTROL
 
 
G
 
ROUP
 
 
(N=27)
D
 
ACLIZUMAB
 
 
G
 
ROUP
 
 
(N=28)
 
Age (yr) 50±13 53±14
Sex (no.)
Male
Female
21
6
22
6
Age of donor (yr) 34±10 29±12
Cold-ischemia time (min) 173±60 209±69†
Cytomegalovirus prophy-
laxis (no.)
16 15
HLA match (no.)
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-DR
9
3
9
13
7
13
Follow-up (days) 502±117 454±76
 
Figure 1.
 
 Cyclosporine Levels (Panel A) and Doses of Predni-
sone (Panel B) in the Control and Daclizumab Groups.
Values for cyclosporine and prednisone are means. Asterisks
denote P=0.02.
0
30
1 6
5
10
15
20
25
2 3 4 5
**
Month
DOSE OF PREDNISONE (mg/day)
Control groupH
Daclizumab group
24H
24
18H
15
21H
13
13H
10
12H
8
11H
6
Control group
Daclizumab group
P
re
d
n
is
o
n
eH
(m
g
/d
ay
)
B
 
A
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 616
 
·
 
March 2,  2000
 
The New England Journal  of  Medicine
 
Overall survival at one year was similar in the two
groups. There were four deaths in the control group,
three of which occurred during the index hospitaliza-
tion (two were due to rejection and one to infection).
The death that occurred after the index hospitaliza-
tion was due to overwhelming cytomegalovirus in-
fection. There were two deaths in the daclizumab
group, both after the index hospitalization. One was
due to acute rejection, which occurred in the month
after the completion of daclizumab therapy. The oth-
er death was due to pneumonia caused by influenza
A virus or aspergillosis.
The incidence of production of anti-HLA antibod-
ies was significantly lower among patients assigned
to daclizumab. IgG anti-HLA antibodies developed
in 6 of the 28 patients in the daclizumab group (21
percent), as compared with 19 of the 27 controls (70
percent, P<0.001). The lower rate in the daclizumab
group was accounted for by parallel reductions in ti-
ters of IgG antibodies with specificity against either
HLA class I or HLA class II antigens. Findings were
similar with respect to the production of IgM anti-
HLA antibodies (10 percent in the daclizumab group
vs. 45 percent in the control group, P=0.01).
In addition to the longer time to a first rejection
episode in the daclizumab group, there was also a
nonsignificant trend toward a longer time to a pos-
itive result on the lymphocyte-growth assay in the bi-
opsy specimens from the patients in this group, as
shown in Figure 3 (P=0.27). The one episode of re-
jection resulting in death that occurred after the three-
month period of induction therapy was preceded by
a positive finding on the lymphocyte-growth assay and
the new onset of circulating anti-HLA antibodies.
Of the other 12 episodes of rejection that occurred
after induction therapy, 2 (17 percent) were preceded
by positive lymphocyte-growth assays and 7 (58 per-
cent) were preceded by the production of anti-HLA
IgG antibodies.
 
Adverse Events
 
The administration of daclizumab was not associ-
ated with any short-term adverse reactions. There was
no evidence of allergic reaction, the cytokine release
 
Figure 2.
 
 Kaplan–Meier Analysis of the Length of Time to a First Episode of Rejection in the Control
and Daclizumab Groups.
The dashed portion of the curves represents the anticipated values for the completion of the study on
the basis of the currently available data.
0
100
0 12
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
3
P=0.04H
Induction period
P=0.44H
Postinduction period
Daclizumab groupH
(n=28)
Control groupH
(n=27)
6 9
Months after Transplantation
P
at
ie
n
ts
 w
it
h
o
u
t 
R
ej
ec
ti
o
n
 (
%
)
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 PREVENTION OF REJECTION IN CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION BY BLOCKADE OF THE INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR
 
Volume 342 Number 9
 
·
 
617
 
syndrome, fever, or myalgias. Similarly, there were no
long-term adverse effects. Specifically, there were no
cases of cancer in the daclizumab group, as com-
pared with one case of polyclonal lymphoma in the
control group.
The frequency of readmission to the hospital for
any reason was similar in the two groups (17 readmis-
sions in the daclizumab group vs. 21 in the control
group). Infections accounted for the largest number
of readmissions, and the incidence of readmission due
to infection was the same in the two groups (11 re-
admissions in each group). The incidence of the most
common cause of infection, cytomegalovirus, which
was diagnosed on the basis of symptoms and sero-
logic testing, was similar in the two groups (seven cas-
es in the daclizumab group and five in the control
group). The incidence of tissue-invasive cytomegalo-
virus infection requiring hospitalization and intrave-
nous therapy with ganciclovir was also similar (six
cases in the daclizumab group vs. four in the control
group). The other infectious complications in the da-
clizumab group were one case each of pneumonia,
bronchitis, gastroenteritis, and pyelonephritis. In the
control group, such complications were one case each
of bronchitis, abscess of the frontal lobe, cellulitis, ap-
pendicitis, hepatitis, and pyelonephritis.
The frequency of readmission because of rejection
was the same in the two groups (two in each group),
and the frequency of readmission for any cause other
than infection or rejection was similar (four readmis-
sions in the daclizumab group and eight in the control
group). Reasons for readmission included steroid-
related psychosis (one in each group), generalized sei-
zures (two in the control group), cholecystectomy
(one in each group), duodenal ulcer (one in the con-
trol group), pain due to osteoporosis of the hip (one
in the daclizumab group), hip replacement (one in the
daclizumab group), optic neuritis (one in the con-
trol group), recurrent tamponade (one in the control
group), and supraventricular tachycardia (one in the
control group).
 
DISCUSSION
 
As compared with generalized immunosuppressive
therapy, induction therapy with daclizumab decreased
the frequency of rejection, prolonged the time to a
first rejection episode in the first three months after
cardiac transplantation, and decreased the overall se-
verity of rejection. In addition, as compared with the
patients in the control group, those in the daclizumab
group were less likely to need rescue therapy with an-
tilymphocytic agents, needed less prednisone by the
fifth month after transplantation, and were less likely
to have immunologic reactivity against the allograft.
Daclizumab was more effective at reducing the fre-
quency of rejection episodes in our patients than in
a previously described series of renal-allograft recip-
ients treated with daclizumab.
 
10
 
 This may reflect the
fact that we used mycophenolate mofetil instead of
azathioprine, since it is superior to azathioprine in
preventing allograft rejection when it is part of a tri-
ple-drug immunosuppressive regimen.
 
14,15
 
There has been considerable debate about the value
of induction therapy with monoclonal or polyclonal
antibodies after cardiac transplantation. Monoclonal-
antibody–based approaches, aimed at interrupting
the activation of CD3 cells,
 
7,16
 
 are extremely effective
in terminating acute episodes of allograft rejection and
in treating refractory rejection. However, the results
of comparative studies of outcomes with and without
monoclonal induction therapy have varied, with most
studies demonstrating an effect on rejection that is
maintained only while antibody therapy is ongoing.
 
16
 
Without repeated administration, these agents only
delay the time to a first rejection episode without de-
creasing the overall frequency or severity of rejection.
 
16
 
At a mechanistic level, therefore, these agents appear
to induce T-cell anergy and not clonal deletion.
 
17,18
 
Moreover, since neutralizing antimouse antibodies
against the monoclonal agent inevitably develop after
 
*The duration of the induction period was three months; the period af-
ter induction was nine months.
 
T
 
ABLE
 
 2.
 
 S
 
EVERITY
 
 
 
AND
 
 F
 
REQUENCY
 
 
 
OF
 
 R
 
EJECTION
 
 E
 
PISODES
 
, 
IgG A
 
NTIBODY
 
 P
 
RODUCTION
 
, 
 
AND
 
 P
 
OSITIVE
 
 R
 
ESULTS
 
 
 
ON
 
 
 
THE
 
 L
 
YMPHOCYTE
 
-G
 
ROWTH
 
 A
 
SSAY
 
 
 
DURING
 
 
 
AND
 
 
 
AFTER
 
 
 
THE
 
 I
 
NDUCTION
 
 P
 
ERIOD
 
.*
 
V
 
ARIABLE
 
C
 
ONTROL
 
 
G
 
ROUP
 
 
(N=27)
D
 
ACLIZUMAB
 
 
G
 
ROUP
 
 
(N=28) P V
 
ALUE
 
No. of grade »2 rejection episodes
Total
During induction
After induction
27
17
10
17
5
12
0.09
0.007
0.72
No. of grade 2 rejection episodes
Total
During induction
After induction
18
10
8
15
4
11
0.52
0.09
0.53
No. of grade 3 rejection episodes
Total
During induction
After induction
9
7
2
2
1
1
0.03
0.03
0.54
No. of patients with »2 rejection
episodes
Total
During induction
After induction
7
3
4
5
0
5
0.47
0.07
0.76
Frequency of rejections (episodes/
patient)
Total
During induction
After induction
1.12
0.64
0.54
0.67
0.19
0.50
0.09
0.02
0.85
No. of patients with IgG antibodies
Total
During induction
After induction
19
14
5
6
4
2
<0.001
0.004
0.04
No. of patients with positive lympho-
cyte-growth assay
Total
During induction
After induction
13
10
3
10
7
3
0.26
0.27
0.26
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 618
 
·
 
March 2,  2000
 
The New England Journal  of  Medicine
 
10 to 14 days of treatment, prolonged or repeated
courses are generally not possible. Therapy with mon-
oclonal or polyclonal antibodies has also been asso-
ciated with a greater incidence of opportunistic infec-
tion and cancer, probably because of the nonspecific
T-cell suppression that results from such treatment.
Frequent side effects, such as the cytokine release syn-
drome, allergic reactions, fever, and thrombocytope-
nia, also occur with these drugs.
Treatment with daclizumab resulted in a significant
reduction in the frequency and severity of rejection
during the treatment period, but after the cessation of
therapy, the frequency of rejection increased to a level
similar to that in the control group. This finding sug-
gests that daclizumab has an immunomodulatory ef-
fect that is similar to that of other monoclonal anti-
body–based therapies (i.e., it induces clonal anergy
rather than clonal deletion). However, daclizumab, a
human monoclonal antibody directed against the in-
terleukin-2 receptor, has several advantages over other
induction agents. Given its unique composition, its use
is not functionally immunogenic.
 
19-21
 
 Its effective se-
rum half-life is 21 days
 
22
 
; five doses thus provide sat-
uration for at least 3 months (as determined by recep-
tor-saturation studies
 
23
 
), which covers the period of
the highest incidence of cardiac-allograft rejection.
 
2
 
Moreover, this lack of immunogenicity makes possible
prolonged courses and may permit repeated use of
this agent for more than three months. Furthermore,
rejection that occurred after the cessation of daclizu-
mab therapy was generally preceded by the develop-
ment of circulating IgG anti-HLA antibodies. Indeed,
the one death due to acute rejection in the daclizumab
group was preceded by both the formation of circulat-
ing IgG antibodies and a positive result on the lym-
phocyte-growth assay. Therefore, careful immunologic
screening may identify patients who require pro-
longed, higher-dose, or repeated daclizumab therapy.
Interestingly, although the frequency of acute re-
jection episodes was significantly reduced during da-
clizumab therapy, the number of interleukin-2–acti-
vated T cells present in the allograft, as measured by
the lymphocyte-growth assay, did not differ signifi-
cantly between the groups. Doses of daclizumab that
were suboptimal because of the biodistribution or
because some patients had a more vigorous interleu-
 
Figure 3.
 
 Kaplan–Meier Analysis of the Length of Time to a Positive Lymphocyte-Growth Assay in the
Control and Daclizumab Groups.
The dashed portion of the curves represents the anticipated values for the completion of the study on
the basis of the currently available data.
0
100
0 12
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
3
P=0.27H
Induction period
P=0.72H
Postinduction period
Daclizumab groupH
(n=28)
Control groupH
(n=27)
6 9
Months after Transplantation
P
at
ie
n
ts
 w
it
h
o
u
t 
P
o
si
ti
ve
 L
ym
p
h
o
cy
te
-G
ro
w
th
 A
ss
ay
 (
%
)
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 PREVENTION OF REJECTION IN CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION BY BLOCKADE OF THE INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR
 
Volume 342 Number 9
 
·
 
619
 
kin-2 response than others, reflecting such fixed im-
munologic variables as HLA-DR mismatching, may
account for this finding.
Daclizumab therapy also produced a marked re-
duction in the formation of anti-HLA antibodies
that was sustained, even after induction therapy was
stopped. The development of anti-HLA IgG anti-
bodies after the cessation of daclizumab therapy gen-
erally preceded the onset of late rejection, suggesting
that the lymphocyte-growth assay may be helpful in
determining the optimal dose of daclizumab for re-
cipients of heart transplants in the future. The fact
that daclizumab affects the production of anti-HLA
antibodies suggests that the drug has a prominent ef-
fect on the indirect pathway of recognition. The in-
direct pathway of CD4 T-cell activation plays an im-
portant part in the development of acute and chronic
allograft rejection.
 
24
 
 Whereas primary rejection ap-
pears always to be accompanied by recognition by the
recipient’s T cells of a dominant HLA-DR allopep-
tide presented by self-antigen–presenting cells,
 
25,26
 
 re-
current episodes of rejection and the development
of transplant-related coronary disease appear to re-
sult from the activation of antigen-specific B cells by
soluble HLA-DR molecules.27-29 Since the develop-
ment of anti-HLA IgG antibodies to the graft has
been associated with the development of cellular
rejection13 and graft atherosclerosis,30 effective inhibi-
tion by interleukin-2–receptor blockade may thus fa-
vorably influence both the development of transplant-
related coronary artery disease and long-term survival.
The short-term safety profile of daclizumab ap-
pears to be superior to that of other therapies based
on monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies. The admin-
istration of daclizumab was not associated with any
detectable signs of the cytokine release syndrome or
allergic responses. The incidence of infection or cancer
was not higher in the daclizumab group than in the
control group. This finding may reflect the fact that
more selective immunosuppression can be achieved
or that the dose of prednisone can be tapered more
rapidly with daclizumab therapy than with conven-
tional immunosuppressive therapy.
In conclusion, daclizumab is an effective adjuvant
immunomodulating agent in nonsensitized recipients
of cardiac transplants. It has advantages over conven-
tional induction therapy with muromonab-CD3 or
antithymocyte globulin because it is more selective
and because it can be used for prolonged and poten-
tially repeated periods. Studies with larger cohorts are
needed to address the short-term and long-term sur-
vival benefits for patients and should determine the
optimal dosing schedules with the possible repeated
use of daclizumab.
REFERENCES
1. Bourge RC, Naftel DC, Costanzo-Nordin MR, et al. Pretransplantation 
risk factors for death after heart transplantation: a multiinstitutional study. 
J Heart Lung Transplant 1993;12:549-62.
2. Kubo SH, Naftel DC, Mills RM Jr, et al. Risk factors for late recurrent 
rejection after heart transplantation: a multiinstitutional, multivariable 
analysis. J Heart Lung Transplant 1995;14:409-18.
3. Ventura HO, Mehra MR, Smart FW, Stapleton DD. Cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy: current concepts. Am Heart J 1995;129:791-9.
4. Costanzo-Nordin MR. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy: relationship with 
acute cellular rejection and histocompatibility. J Heart Lung Transplant 
1992;11:S90-S103.
5. Uretsky BF, Murali S, Reddy PS, et al. Development of coronary artery 
disease in cardiac transplant patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy 
with cyclosporine and prednisone. Circulation 1987;76:827-34.
6. Hammond EH, Yowell RL, Price GD, et al. Vascular rejection and its 
relationship to allograft coronary artery disease. J Heart Lung Transplant 
1992;11:S111-S119.
7. Norman DJ, Kahana L, Stuart FP Jr, et al. A randomized clinical trial 
of induction therapy with OKT3 in kidney transplantation. Transplantation 
1993;55:44-50.
8. Morris RE. Mechanisms of action of new immunosuppressive drugs. 
Kidney Int Suppl 1996;53:S26-S38.
9. Taniguchi T, Minami Y. The IL-2/IL-2 receptor system: a current over-
view. Cell 1993;73:5-8.
10. Vincenti F, Kirkman R, Light S, et al. Interleukin-2–receptor block-
ade with daclizumab to prevent acute rejection in renal transplantation. 
N Engl J Med 1998;338:161-5.
11. Billingham ME, Cary NRB, Hammond ME, et al. A working formu-
lation for the standardization of nomenclature in the diagnosis of heart and 
lung rejection. J Heart Transplant 1990;9:587-93.
12. Fisher PE, Suciu-Foca N, Ho E, Michler RE, Rose EA, Mancini D. 
Additive value of immunologic monitoring to histologic grading of heart 
allograft biopsy specimens: implications for therapy. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant 1995;14:1156-61.
13. Itescu S, Tung TCM, Burke EM, et al. An immunological algorithm 
to predict risk of high-grade rejection in cardiac transplant recipients. Lan-
cet 1998;352:263-70.
14. Kobashigawa J, Miller L, Renlund D, et al. A randomized active-con-
trolled trial of mycophenolate mofetil in heart transplant recipients. Trans-
plantation 1998;66:507-15.
15. Sollinger HW. Mycophenolate mofetil for the prevention of acute re-
jection in primary cadaveric renal allograft recipients. Transplantation 
1995;60:225-32.
16. Johnson MR, Mullen GM, O’Sullivan EJ, et al. Risk/benefit ratio of 
perioperative OKT3 in cardiac transplantation. Am J Cardiol 1994;74:261-6.
17. Arnold B, Schonrich G, Hammerling GJ. Multiple levels of peripheral 
tolerance. Immunol Today 1993;14:12-4.
18. Kabelitz D. Apoptosis, graft rejection, and transplantation tolerance. 
Transplantation 1998;65:869-75.
19. Hakimi J, Mould D, Waldmann TA, Queen C, Anasetti C, Light S. 
Development of Zenapax: a humanized anti-Tac antibody. In: Harris WJ, 
Adair JR, eds. Antibody therapeutics. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press, 1997:
277-300.
20. Hakimi J, Chizzonite R, Luke DR, et al. Reduced immunogenicity 
and improved pharmacokinetics of humanized anti-Tac in cynomolgus 
monkeys. J Immunol 1991;147:1352-9.
21. Brown PS Jr, Parenteau GL, Dirbas FM, et al. Anti-Tac-H, a human-
ized antibody to the interleukin 2 receptor, prolongs primate cardiac allo-
graft survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:2663-7.
22. Anasetti C, Hansen JA, Waldmann TA, et al. Treatment of acute graft-
versus-host disease with humanized anti-Tac: an antibody that binds to the 
interleukin-2 receptor. Blood 1994;84:1320-7.
23. Stock PG, Lantz M, Light S, Vincenti F. In vivo (phase I) trial and in 
vitro efficacy of humanized anti-Tac for the prevention of rejection in renal 
transplant recipients. Transplant Proc 1996;28:915-6.
24. Liu Z, Sun YK, Xi YP, et al. Contribution of direct and indirect rec-
ognition pathways to T cell alloreactivity. J Exp Med 1993;177:1643-50.
25. Liu Z, Colovai AI, Tugulea S, et al. Indirect recognition of donor 
HLA-DR peptides in organ allograft rejection. J Clin Invest 1996;98:
1150-7.
26. Tugulea S, Ciubotariu R, Colovai AI, et al. New strategies for early 
diagnosis of heart allograft rejection. Transplantation 1997;64:842-7.
27. Vanderlugt CJ, Miller SD. Epitope spreading. Curr Opin Immunol 
1996;8:831-6.
28. Mamula MJ, Janeway CA Jr. Do B cells drive the diversification of im-
mune responses? Immunol Today 1993;14:151-4.
29. Reed EF, Hong B, Ho E, Harris PE, Weinberger J, Suciu-Foca N. 
Monitoring of soluble HLA alloantigens and anti-HLA antibodies identi-
fies heart allograft recipients at risk of transplant-associated coronary artery 
disease. Transplantation 1996;61:566-72.
30. Rose EA, Pepino P, Barr ML, et al. Relation of HLA antibodies and 
graft atherosclerosis in human cardiac allograft recipients. J Heart Lung 
Transplant 1992;3:S120-S123.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on October 14, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2000 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
