I ORIGINAL ARTICLES I
Antihypertensive efficacy of a-methyldopa, chiorothiazide
and Supres-150 (a-methyldopa-chlorothiazide)
P.G. FERNANDEZ,* MD, MRCP (GLASG), MRCP (UK), FRCP[C]; P.K. ZACHARIAH, MD, PH D;
D.G. BRYANT,t PH D; S.S. MISSAN4 MD, FRCP[C]
Twenty-two white men and two white women with uncom-
plicated essential hypertension participated in a randomized
double-blind trial comparing placebo with .-methyldopa (750
mg/d orally) and chlorothiazide (450 mg/d orally), alone or
in combination. There were no significant differences in
blood pressures as measured with the patients lying down;
however, with the patients standing the systolic, diastolic
and mean arterial blood pressures were significantly lower
(P K 0.05) after treatment with .-methyldopa or the com-
bination product. The higher the blood pressure before
treatment, the greater the fall with treatment. Adverse
effects were infrequent.
Vingt-deux hommes et deux femmes de race blanche souf-
frant d'hypertension arterielle essentielle sans complica-
tion ont participe a une etude randomisee a double insu
comparant un placebo a l'c.-methyldopa (750 mg/j oralement)
et au chlorothiazide (450 mg/j oralement) utilises seuls ou
en association. On n'a observe aucune difference significa-
tive entre les tensions arterielles mesurees chez les pa-
tients en position horizontale; toutefois, en position debout
les tensions arterielles systoliques, diastoliques et moyen-
nes se sont significativement abaissees (P K 0.05) apres
traitement avec l'.x-m6thyldopa ou avec l'association des
produits. L'importance de Ia chute de tension art6rielle
apres traitement a ete proportionnelle a l'importance de Ia
tension avant traitement. Les effets secondaires ont ete
rares.
Chiorothiazide, a well established diuretic, lowers the
blood pressure with continued administration when
the dietary intake of salt is restricted.1 The precise
mechanisms by which diuretics and dietary salt re-
striction lower the blood pressure are not entirely
understood. However, chlorothiazide's effects are
From the discipline of medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland
*Associate professor of medicine
tAssociate professor of biostatistics
.Assistant clinical professor of medicine
Reprint requests to: Dr. P.C. Fernandez, Health Science
Centre, Rm. 2336, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
300 Prince Philip Dr., St. John's, Nfld. AiB 3V6
greatest when the drug is given in conjunction with
other, more potent antihypertensive agents, such as
a-methyldopa.'
Fixed-dose combinations of antihypertensive agents
are currently quite popular with practising physicians.
Some argue that it is difficult to tailor the use of a
combination to the needs of the individual patient and
that the amount of each component may be greater
in separate tablets than in the combination tablet. On
the other hand, advocates of the combination products
contend that any disadvantages are outweighed by
the economy, the convenience to the patient and the
ease of compliance, the last being an important factor
in the successful treatment of hypertension.3
Supres-1 50, a combination of 250 mg of a-methyl-
dopa and 150 mg of chlorothiazide, is widely pre-
scribed by family physicians in Canada. We designed
a study to compare the antihypertensive efficacy of
this combination product with that of each of its
components and to assess the tolerability of these
drugs.
Methods
Patient selection
To avoid a narrow time-span for entry into the
study, we invited at random one patient from each
successive pair presenting at a hypertension clinic
because of uncomplicated essential hypertension to
participate. One patient withdrew and was replaced
after the others had been selected.
Antihypertensive agents were replaced by placebo
tablets for 3 weeks, during which period the blood
pressure was measured weekly in the morning by the
same nurse-clinician using the standard gravitational
sphygmomanometer and cuff. The pressures were re-
corded in the right arm after the patient had been
lying down for 10 minutes and after he or she had
been standing for 3 minutes, with the diastolic blood
pressure taken at the point at which the fourth Korot-
koff sound was heard; three readings were taken and
284 CMA JOURNAL/AUGUST 23, 1980/VOL. 123
Table Il-Latin square design of the trial
Group Period*
1 M W M+C W P W C
2 M+C W C W M W P
3 C W P W M+C W M
4 P W M W C W M+C
*M = x-methyldopa, 750 mg/d; C = chlorothiazide, 450 mg/d; P =
placebo; W = drug washout-withdrawal. The M, M + C, C and P
periods lasted 4 weeks and the W period 2 weeks.
Table Ill-Mean blood pressures after 4-week periods of placebo or
drug treatment
Treatment; mean blood Standard error
pressure (mm Hg) (mm Hg)
Position
and pressure P M C M + C Pooledt Adjusted.
Lying
Systolic 164 162 163 158 3 3
Diastolic 105 103 106 102 2 1
Mean arterial 124 123 125 121 2 2
Standing
Systolic 163 153* 159 154* 3 2
Diastolic 110 104* 108 105* 2 1
Mean arterial 128 120* 125 122* 2 1
*Significantly different (P < 0.05) from placebo values with adjusted
standard error.
tFrom Latin square analysis of variance.
Adjusted according to Cranston and colleagues6 and Degnbol,
Dorph and Marner.6
in mean blood pressure were clinically important, ex-
ceeding 8 mm Hg systolic or 4 mm Hg diastolic. Such
decreases were documented with the patient standing
after treatment with a-methyldopa alone or in com-
bination with chlorothiazide, but they were absent with
the patient lying down. We found that the standard
error from the Latin square analysis could be reduced
by covariance techniques, thus permitting the data to
be tested with greater precision; as a result the clin-
ically important decreases were found to be statistically
significant (P < 0.05) (Table III).
In analysing the blood pressures without treatment
before the trial measured with the patients lying down
and the changes in blood pressure with the various
treatments, we found that most of the correlation co-
efficients were significantly different from zero (P <
0.05), whereas the regression lines were not signif-
icant because of the high variation (Fig. 1). The sys-
tolic measurements after low-dose oral treatment with
chlorothiazide (450 mg daily) were continuous with
those reported by Cranston and colleagues5 for low-
dose oral treatment with bendrofluazide (1.25 mg
three times daily), cyclopenthiazide (0.25 mg three
times daily) and chlorthalidone (50 mg daily) (Fig. 2).
Adverse effects were remarkably infrequent: one
patient was dropped from the study because of severe
abdominal cramps and diarrhea that developed 1 hour
after 150 mg of chlorothiazide was taken and disap-
peared when this treatment was stopped. There were
no clinically important changes in the electrocardio-
grams, chest roentgenograms or laboratory values.
Furthermore, there were no changes in the physical
findings between the beginning and the end of the
trial, including the patients' weights (mean ± standard
error: 81.8 ± 2.6 and 80.9 ± 2.6 kg respectively).
The pill counts indicated that all patients used more
than 80% of the tablets.
Discussion
Alpha methyldopa and chlorothiazide are well es-
w
1/)
U)
.
a-
-J 0 0
4 _______
- 0 * * .'00
*0.000 0 0
'-I %0.oa:
4E.20 0.00 000
0 0
w
(9 -40 0 000
z
4
IU 150 200 250
INITIAL SBP (mm Hg)
FIG. 2-Relation of initial systolic blood pressure with
the patient lying down to change in systolic pressure with
low-dose oral chlorothiazide treatment (450 mg daily) in
our trial (black circles) and that in trial of Cranston and
colleagues5 (white circles) of low-dose oral treatment with
three diuretics (bendrofluazide [1.25 mg three times daily],
cyclopenthiazide [0.25 mg three times daily] and chlor-
thalidone [50 mg daily]).
20 r
cC- METHYLDOPA
S. .*0
* @0.
S 0
yY V
0
CHLOROTH IAZ IDEPLACEBO
0
Y
YV
'V
4
cC- METHYLDOPA tCHLOROTHIAZIDE
V
INITIAL ARTERIAL PRESSURE (mm Hg)
4.
I
E
E
w
D
L/)
L/)
w
ii:
a-
-J
4
w
a:
4
z
w
c.9
z
4
I
U
tablished antihypertensive agents.1 Evidence from the
Veterans Administration cooperative group on anti-
hypertensive agents7 has established that the prognosis
of essential hypertension is proportional to the degree
of reduction of the diastolic blood pressure. Although
several studies have compared the results of treat-
ment with antihypertensive agents used alone or in
combination,8-'0 we are unaware of one comparing
placebo with a-methyldopa and chlorothiazide used
alone or in combination at the daily doses we used.
However, a similar study of the same design com-
paring placebo with a-methyldopa and hydrochioro-
thiazide alone and in combination has been carried
out.2
We found statistically significant decreases in the
blood pressures with the patients standing after treat-
ment wtih a-methyldopa alone or in combination with
chlorothiazide. It could be postulated that the de-
creases were predominantly the result of the anti-
hypertensive efficacy of a-methyldopa, for the dose
of chlorothiazide may have been too low to cause
detectable changes in blood pressure.
The routine suggestions to hypertensive patients to
adhere to a low-salt diet, correct obesity and cease
smoking are rarely effective in controlling the blood
pressure except in patients with the mildest hyper-
tension.1' Our patients were instructed to keep their
dietary intake of salt to less than 2.3 g a day. The
absence of decreases in the blood pressures after
chlorothiazide treatment and the lack of a significant
difference between the response to a-methyldopa and
the response to the combination could be attributed to
the traditionally high salt intake (15 to 20 g a day) of
the patients.12 DahP3 repeatedly emphasized the merit
of modest restriction of the salt in a patient's diet in
controlling the blood pressure.
Although a-methyldopa and chlorothiazide are
known to lower the blood pressure as measured with
the patient lying down or standing, in our study the
blood pressures were not lower with the treated pa-
tients lying down. We have no clear explanation for
this phenomenon; one factor may be that our data,
although continuous with those of Cranston and col-
leagues,5 were at the lower end of the regression line
(Fig. 2). Furthermore, in the individual hypertensive
patient the fall in blood pressure produced by diuretics
is related to the fall attained by moderate sodium
restriction;'4 thus, failure to maintain the modest salt
restriction could negate the antihypertensive effect of
chlorothiazide. The precise mechanisms by which di-
uretics and salt restriction lower the blood pressure
are debatable.'5"'
Investigators have established, and our data con-
firm, that the higher the blood pressure before treat-
ment, measured with the patient lying down, the
greater the change in blood pressure with treat-
ment.5'6"0 This is true regardless of age, race, duration
of hypertension and duration of antihypertensive ther-
apy.'7 The potential to respond to treatment is there-
fore a critical consideration in any trial involving a
reduction in blood pressure.
Adverse effects of treatment were negligible in our
trial, except for a gastrointestinal reaction to chioro-
thiazide in one patient, who had to be dropped from
the study. The relatively low doses of a-methyldopa
and chlorothiazide may have been responsible for the
high tolerance of these agents.
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance given by J.
Chaytor, G. O'Reilly, J. Blackmore, Dr. E. Curtis, K.
Patel and V. Patel, and we thank J. Tremblett for typing
the manuscript.
This study was supported by a grant in aid from Merck-
Frosst Laboratories, Pointe Claire-Dorval, PQ.
References
1. Nici..sor.. M, RUEDY J: Antihypertensive agents and the
drug therapy of hypertension, in Pharmacological Basis
of Therapeutics, 5th ed, GOODMAN LS, GILMAN A (eds),
Macmillan, New York, 1975, p 712
2. MCMAHON FG: Efficacy of an antihypertensive agent.
Comparison of methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide in
combination and singly. JAMA 231: 155, 1975
3. CLARK GM, TROOP RC: One-tablet combination drug
therapy in the treatment of hypertension. J Chronic Dis
25: 57, 1972
4. STEEL RGD, TORRIE JH: Principles and Procedures of
Statistics, McGraw, Toronto, 1960, p 109
5. CRANSTON WI, JUEL-JENSEN BE, SEMMENCE AM, et al:
Effects of oral diuretics on raised arterial pressure. Lancet
2: 966, 1963
6. DEGNBOL B, DORPH 5, MARNER T: The effect of different
diuretics on elevated blood pressure and serum potassium.
Acta Med Scand 193: 407, 1973
7. Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on
Antihypertensive Agents: Effects of treatment on mor-
bidity in hypertension. II. Results in patients with diastolic
blood pressure averaging 90 through 114 mm Hg. JAMA
213: 1143, 1970
8. KLAPPER MS, RICHARD LS, SMITH GH: Methyldopa-
chlorothiazide - a long term evaluation. South Med J
63: 77, 1970
9. WILSON WR, OKUM R, TETRAULT L, et al: Methyldopa
and hydrochiorothiazide in primary hypertension. Con-
trolled clinical trial of drugs singly and in combination.
JAMA 185: 819, 1963
10. GRIEBLE HG, JOHNSON LC: Treatment of arterial hyper-
tensive disease with diuretics. I. Effects on blood pressure
of bendroflumethiazide, potassium chloride, and spirono-
lactone. Arch Intern Med 110: 26, 1962
11. MOSER M: Long term management of hypertension, in
Hypertension: Mechanisms, Diagnosis and Treatment,
ONESTI G, BREST AN (eds), Davis, Philadelphia, 1978,
p 217
12. KAPLAN NM (ed): Essential hypertension, in Clinical
Hyperi.en.ion, 2nd ed, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore,
1978, p 106
13. DAHL LK: Salt and hypertension. Am J Cliii Nutr 25:
231, 1972
14. CONWAY J: Antihypertensive effects of diuretics, in
A atihypertensive A pen ts, GROSS F (ed), Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1977, p 486
15. Ibid, p 485
16. BROWN WJ, BROWN FK, KRISHNAN I: Exchangeable
sodium and blood volume in normotensives and hyper-
tensive humans on high and low sodium intake. Circula-
hon 43: 508, 1971
17. Veterans Administration Cooperative Study on Antihyper-
tensive Agents: Double blind control study of antihyper-
tensive agents. II. Further report on the comparative ef-
fectiveness of reserpine, reserpine and hydralazine, and
three ganglion blocking agents, chlorisondamine, meca-
mylamine, and pentolinium tartrate. Arch intern Med 110:
222, 1962
CMA JOURNAL/AUGUST 23, 1980/VOL. 123 287
